So we've just seen how sudo can cause some chaos
but also give you extra privileges,
and speaking of privileges
the files have different permission existence
and different privileges
that allow you to do different things to them.
So there's three types of privilege,
one is read, one is write, and one is execute.
Now we looked at executing programmes
in a previous video series.
Read is being able to read the content,
and write is to be able change the contents
but also delete the file itself.
Now going back to rems-dir,
remember I am remy,
sorry, this user is called rem,
which we see there in the prompt,
and this other user called remy
has created this secret file,
and when I try and cat the secret
I don't have permission.
Now there's a few reasons for that.
The first one is this.
This tells us what the permissions are.
In fact, actually if we go back into the directory
we can see there's quite a bit
of information in this listing,
and on the left column when I include the -l
it gives me the permissions and the type.
So I'm interested in this column here.
A directory has a d at the beginning,
so that's a clue that's a directory.
When I do ltr, oops,
I also in my personal terminal setup
if I recall correctly actually has slashes
on the end of each one of the directories,
so there's an extra clue
that I'm looking at a directory,
but here the first character is used to tell us
whether it's a directory or whether it's a file.
So all of these are directories except for this last one
because we see there's no d.
The first three columns are the user permissions,
and the user permissions are me,
the person using this machine,
I'm sorry, the the owner of the file,
not the person using the machine, the owner of the file.
The owner of the file is rem.
So I own the Pictures directory, Desktop, and so on.
So I have read, write, and execute,
and execute on a directory
I think it doesn't tend to mean a lot,
but it means if there's an executable file in there
I can execute it.
That might not be completely correct.
But if we look in the bin directory
we have that hello file from Chapter 2.
We can see read, write, execute.
So that means I can execute that hello programme.
So if we just try and run that just as a reminder, it runs.
It just echos out Hello world.
So the next group,
this after the first three, these three here,
and this freezing.log that belongs to the rem user
is marked as read and then nothing and nothing,
so that means it's only readable by people in my group.
So it goes user, the next three is group,
and the last three is other, people outside of my group.
And on a Mac they have this group called staff
which normal users are part of.
I think root user is part of staff,
and any user on this machine would be part of staff.
And then depending on the complexity
of the system you're working on
there might be other groups and so on,
but in this case any other user on this machine
will be in the group staff,
and they will be able to read this file.
Now if we look at this file, the hello file down here,
you'll see that the group commission is the r and the x,
and that means that anyone in my group can read the file,
but anyone else can execute the file,
anyone on my group can execute the file.
You can see the same thing repeated in the last column,
and that means that anyone who comes to this machine
if they're signed in they can run that file.
So if I had like a guest user sign in
that isn't part of the staff group,
they can still run this file and that will work,
and they can actually look at the contents of it as well.
But if we go into the rems-dir
and look at what's in there
we look at the permissions again,
remember the first three is the owner, the user,
the person who owns the file,
and in that case it was remy,
and I might use it.
There's two different users, one is remy, and one is rem,
sorry if that's confusing,
and everything else is blank.
Even though I'm in the same group
it means that I can look at the file
and have permission to look at the file.
So if I wanted to be able to read the file
I would need to have a read permission just here.
So I'm gonna use sudo to do that,
and I'm gonna change permissions.
In fact actually I'm gonna show,
before I do that I'm gonna show you
the same permissions but with finder.
So if we open up this directory
and we look at the, oops,
oh where did we go?
Go back to finder and look at permissions on this file.
So if I just do Command + I,
I think it's one of these things, Get Info,
down here in the corner
you can see permissions and sharing and so on.
So we can see that the owner is remy,
and that person has read write permissions,
and everyone else has no access.
Now I can unlock that,
which is the same as effectively doing sudo,
then go ahead and change those permissions.
I'm gonna change that for remy,
but I can change it to read only for everyone else.
So let's see how that affects things over here.
Okay, so if you look at
I've done the directory listing again
you can see that now in the other column,
so user, group, other,
other users have read permissions,
so if I cat that file out,
still don't have permission.
Read only, you have no access,
oh...
We have to have the group,
which I don't know how to do from here.
Read write.
That's a bit silly that you can't do it from there,
but we can actually do it from the command line.
I guess I could add myself individually, rem.
I can read.
I can read it.
I'm gonna abort using the finder,
'cause I just wanted to show you that it existed
and can do permissions.
If we go back here,
so the permissions are back to the way they were before.
I can't cat the file out,
but if I do sudo and then change,
chmod, change mod, mode,
mode, yes, okay so chmod means change mode,
and what we're gonna do is make the group
be read permissions.
So we put the file in there, secret.
So we're doing a few things,
we're doing sudo, so we're running it as root,
and we're changing the mode of the file
and we're giving the group,
we're plussing on read permissions to the file secret.
So let's see how that changes.
We see an r there
and we can cat the file out again.
Okay, so this is fairly intuitive
when you come to think of like u is user,
g is group, o is everyone else, others,
and you have read, write, and execute.
So if I do chmod rw and I list it again
you can see now I've got read write access.
There is another way of doing chmod with numbers.
So I'm showing you just so that you're not surprised
when you ever come across it.
The numbers relate to each column.
So if I had 777, three columns,
it's a bit (mumbles) number,
and I could never remember the order precisely.
I think read is one, so if we just do 111.
Nope.
Oh, one is execute, two is write I guess,
so we would do 3, which is one plus three.
Yeah, and we basically add them up.
What do we do, two four and seven is read, write, execute.
So we would do 40.
So that does read, write, execute for the user,
4 is read for the group,
and 0 is nothing for everyone else.
I'm just showing you
so that you know it exists in the first place,
but if you're actually doing chmod on the command line
then you want to use,
I recommend using the text version.
It's a little bit easier to read.
There's just one final part to this.
Now we can change your permissions, that's fine and dandy,
but what if we actually want to own the file?
What if we want to be able to make us the user
rather than this other user remy?
Well we can do that as well.
We can do chown, so change ownership.
If I do chown, I put in the user rem, which is me,
file name, let's see, permission denied,
but if we do sudo we've now changed the ownership to rem,
which means that I can chmod it as I please.
So let's take off the execute,
so u-x secret.
There we go, we weren't asked for the password,
because we are the owner of the file,
we are that user in that first column, okay?
So chmod is permissions, or the mode of the file,
so we have read, write, and execute,
and there are three groups,
there is the user,
which is the person who actually owns the file,
the group, and then the max case
where we're under the same group, the staff,
we can also make it executable,
and to make it executable
chmod u+x, executable,
and then the file name,
and then finally chown,
so we can change the ownership of the file or directory,
and we can do this to files and directories.